---
IMPORTANT NOTE: DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE, instead edit its .mdpp then run ./precheckin.sh
title: Romanian
permalink: Develop/L10n/Style_Guides/Romanian/
parent: Style Guides
grand_parent: L10n
layout: default
---

# Style guidelines and principles

This document provides generic style guidelines for Sailfish OS. The
target audience for this documentation is everyone translating Sailfish
OS-related material. The goal is to create contemporary translations
that provide a high-quality user experience.

Sailfish OS audience and target group for the translations is young,
active users accustomed to social media and therefore its language.

# Basics of good writing style

  - Write in a personal style, engaging and involving the user.
  - Use active style and present tense. Use imperatives and talk to the
    user.
  - Make sure the text is consistent and clear and correct in grammar
    and spelling.
  - Write in short sentences.
  - Use a positive tone, avoid negative expressions.
  - Avoid ambiguity. Make sure that pronouns point clearly to the
    relevant nouns, and avoid long strings of modifiers or nouns.

Remember we are sailing on a jolly boat. Have fun\! Play with the
language. Be innovative and guide the readers onto a journey. Do not
attempt to use humor, but use fresh and fun tone where it naturally
fits. Remember that the most important part is delivering a clear
message.

Note that in technical writing, descriptions and instructions should not
include text that is written from a marketing point of view.

# Language and culture

Because our communication is targeted to international use and part of
it will be translated, try to keep the language culturally unambiguous,
be careful of religious references, and avoid using idiomatic
expressions or slang. The key aspects are clarity and simplicity.
Consider these targets when adapting the jolly tone to the texts. In
software UI translations: Respect the source text, but do not create
word for word translations. Take the context into account when
translating.

## "Subtitle" style

Romanian allows short and a long form of a word or expression, the
longer being often more "academic". Use the short form whenever
possible:

  - este → e
  - astăzi → azi
  - atunci când → când
  - cu 10 minute în urmă → acum 10 minute, de 10 minute
  - în imagine puteți vedea → în imagine vedeți, în imagine se vede
  - poți să \<conjunctiv\> → poți \<infinitiv\> ex - poți să deschizi →
    poți deschide
  - care se refera la → referitor la, privind
  - unul dintre obiecte → unul din obiecte, un obiect

# Grammar

## Articles

When possible, leave out articles.

For example:

  - Correct: **Deschide fișier**
  - Incorrect: **Deschide fișierul/un fișier**

## Person

Please try to be informal if that feels natural in your language. Avoid
mentioning pronouns.

Keep addressing consistent: e.g. if a paragraph was started using the
second person, retain it throughout all its sentences (as opposed to
switching to third person or neutral mood).

## Gender

Use gender-neutral or all-inclusive terms to refer to human beings,
rather than terms that include man, woman, and similar masculine and
feminine terms.

For example:

  - Correct: **Utilizator, Invitat**
  - Incorrect: **Utilizatoare, Invitată**

## Tense

## The future tense versus the present tense

English future can be translated as future or present. The use of the
future tense will imply a logical consequence of something previously
mentioned. The use of the present will create a more direct style. E.g.:

  - Media player will allow you to select songs: Playerul (îți) permite
    să selecționezi cântece.

## Use of imperative

The instructions and commands addressed to the user should be translated
in the imperative. For example:

  - Use this area to select options that must be activated: Folosește
    această zonă pentru alegerea opțiunilor care trebuie activate.

## Modal verbs versus imperative

The literal translation of “could”, “should”, “may” and “might” using
the conditional should be avoided. These forms should be replaced by the
present tense. For example:

  - Determine which file should be installed on your system: Determină
    ce fișier trebuie instalat pe sistem

## Voice

Whenever possible, use the active voice. Keep the message clear and the
sentences short.

For example:

  - Correct: **Crează configurarea contului în...**
  - Incorrect: **Configurarea contului e creată în...**

## Mood

Use the imperative form.

For example:

  - Correct: **Go to Settings**
  - Incorrect: **User goes to Settings**

## Capitalisation

Capitalise application names and company names.

In the UI, start the first word with a capital letter.

Respect capitalisation rules of the language in question.

## Menu style in the UI

User Interface menu items are named using verbs.

## Empty states in the UI

User Interface empty states are typically written in the 2-sentence
form, using verbs and active tone and, where possible, guiding the user
towards the next possible steps to take. Keep sentences short and
content informative. Where possible, guide user to reflect the good
sides of an application or service (like referring to friends instead of
contacts in the People app). For example:\
(tell the situation, what items are missing) (point user to next actions)\
No contacts yet. Pull down to add your friends.

App covers (that are shown in the Home) for empty states aim to be short
informative messages. Length is typically two words.

# Punctuation

## End punctuation

In UI strings, do not use a full stop at the end of a sentence if
there’s only one sentence. If there are two or more sentences, use
full stops normally.

If the segment ends with the colon or ellipsis, the translation should
follow the source.

## Use of punctuation signs

In Romanian commas, periods, colons, semicolons, question and
exclamation marks, suspension points - follow immediately the character
preceding them. For example:

  - Correct: **Vrei să continui?**
  - Incorrect: **Vrei să continui ?**

Opening and closing quotes, brackets, etc. stick to the included part
without space.

  - Correct: **Salvează (fără schimbarea numelui)**
  - Incorrect: **Salvează( fără schimbarea numelui )**

After period, comma, exclamation and question mark there should only be
one space. Comma: In the enumerations separated by commas, the last
element is normally preceded by a conjunction. Do not use a comma before
this conjunction. Colon: After a colon, lower case is generally used,
except where the sentence is a quote, a proper name, or where more than
one sentence follow the colon

## Abbreviations

In technical writing, use common abbreviations. Do not use Latin
abbreviations.

In the UI, use common abbreviations, including Latin abbreviations. Make
sure text clarity does not suffer. If in doubt, do not use an
abbreviation.

Do not use a full stop in or after acronyms or initialisms, e.g.:

  - Correct: **WLAN**
  - Incorrect: **W.L.A.N.**

Do not use a full stop with unit (measurement) symbols, e.g.:

  - Correct: **kg**
  - Incorrect: **kg.**

Use a full stop with Latin abbreviations, e.g.:

  - Correct: **e.g., ca., etc.**
  - Incorrect: **eg, ca, etc**

## Contractions

Do not use contractions (e.g. aren't, should've) in technical writing.

In the UI, contractions can be used when needed if the space is limited.
Make sure that information given to the user is not lost because of such
shortcuts.

Before using a contraction, try to rephrase the text so that contraction
can be avoided. Omit words that are not essential for delivering the
message clearly. If contracting cannot be avoided, minimize the number
of words contracted. It is better to contract one word more than to
contract several words a little.

## Hyphenation

Hyphenate in object-verbal noun compounds.

  - Correct: **read-only file**
  - Incorrect: **read only file** or **readonly file**

## Independent clauses

\= Use a comma between independent clauses joined by and, but, and or.

  - Example: **To open Account, go to Settings, and create new.**

## Diacritics

Use Romanian diacritics and symbols. Bellow there's a list of (char →
unicode) correspondences:

  - î → U00EE
  - Î → U00CE
  - â → U00E2
  - Â → U00C2
  - ă → U0103
  - Ă → U0102
  - ș (cu virgulă) → U0219
  - Ș (cu virgulă) → U0218
  - ț (cu virgulă) → U021B
  - Ț (cu virgulă) → U021A
  - – (ndash) → U2013 Ex. București–Pitești, 14:00–15:00

## Plurals

Do not create plurals with parentheses. Consult translation tool user
guide for handling the plurals.

## Quotation marks

English quotes must be replaced with the „ for opening and ” for closing
(„99 down” and „99 up”, respectively). The « and » (French chevrons)
must only be used when a quotation has to be made within another
quotation.

  - „ → U201E (99 down)
  - ” → U201D (99 up) Ex: „Un citat”, no spaces between quoted text
    and quotes
  - « → U00AB
  - » → U00BB Ex: „O idee «creață»”

## Series

Use a comma to separate elements in a series, except before the last
element - usually introduced by a conjunction.

  - Correct: **Crează, modifică și șterge**
  - Incorrect: **Crează, modifică, și șterge**

Use a semicolon to separate items in a series when one or more items
have internal punctuation.

## Lists

In technical writing, write lists with bullets.

In the UI, write lists without bullets or colons.

## Headings

In technical writing, create structured, consistent and accurate
headings. Consider verb structures in headings.

Only the first word of a heading must be capitalised. Following words
preserve their capitalisation rules (names are Capitalised, etc)

## Text modules

In technical writing, make sure each module can be read independently,
containing all the needed information so that modules do not need to be
read in any certain order.

## Procedures

In technical writing, when describing procedures, make sure to describe
the steps clearly with only one task per step. Describe the expected
results of those steps.

# Numerals

## Numbers

Write numbers as digits, including numbers below 10.

For example:

  - Correct: **1 mesaj primit**
  - Incorrect: **Un mesaj primit**

## Measurements

Use numerals for measurements.

Use a space between the numeral and the unit, except with degree and
percentage sign. E.g.:

  - Correct: **5 cm, 20°, 20 °C**
  - Incorrect: **5cm, 20 °, 20°C**

Use metric units. Use a non breaking space between the numeral and the
unit, including degree and percentage sign. Their abbreviations should
not be followed by a full stop (see Abbreviations too)

# Terminology

Sailfish OS has a separate Terminology project to maintain consistency.
Use that approved terminology when available.

## Company names

Do not translate company names unless there is an official, translated
name available.

## Product names and trademarks

Do not translate product names or trademarks.

## Safety information and legal texts

Warnings, cautions, and notes are legal texts that need to be confirmed
with legal department. In case of legal texts, follow the instructions
carefully and ask for more information if needed.

# Checklist

When finalising translations for the UI, check the following:

  - Everything has been translated to your best knowledge.
  - Spell check is done.
  - Check consistency with the other translations done for the language.
  - Ensure correct Sailfish OS terminology is used. If needed, propose
    new term entries.
  - Confirm legal texts are consistent with the source.
  - Company and product names, trademarks, symbols, and measurements
    have not been hyphenated.
  - Ensure regional formats are retained, such as date, time, numeric
    and quotation literals.

When finalising texts for the technical writing, check these points as
well:

  - Titles and headings are structured and accurate.
  - Language is clear and consistent.
  - Sentences vary in length and have a clear form.

