---
title: Community
permalink: Develop/Collaborate/Community/
parent: Collaborate
layout: default
nav_order: 700
---

Sailfish OS has a vibrant and passionate community following ( o/
everyone\!\! )

Our [Open Source](/Develop/Open_Source) philosophy and our
[heritage](heritage "brokenlink") from Maemo, MeeGo and Mer means that our
community has roots (and members) going back over 10 years.

## What's it about?

One of the important motivations for getting involved in the Open Source
world is said to be 'scratching an itch' -- the idea that something
isn't quite how you'd want it to be so you try to 'fix' it.

Well that itch can come in many areas; historically Open Source has
primarily been about software development and whilst it's still the
largest area there's a lot more going on:

  - All kinds of documentation: tutorials, user guides, reference
    information, examples
  - Helping out: talking to people, arranging meet ups, planning
  - Graphic design: making things look good
  - Software development: applications, middleware, systems, websites
  - Quality assurance: managing bugs and faults, triaging

<!-- end list -->

  - And, of course, **using** it: the first step in joining a community
    is using (and hopefully enjoying\!) the product; the second step is
    finding the community and getting involved in some way.

## Sharing and talking

So how can you talk with like-minded people?

A lot of our community members gather in the [Sailfish OS
Forum](https://forum.sailfishos.org); it's friendly and helpful -- and
mostly run by users. It's where you'd go to find answers to all kinds of
questions or to discuss thoughts with others.

There's a lot of activity on Jolla's [Facebook
page](https://www.facebook.com/jollaofficial) and
[Twitter](https://twitter.com/hashtag/Sailfish OS) (from
[Jolla](https://twitter.com/JollaHQ/) and the community)

We also have real-time chat on IRC -- there are 'channels' there for
general discussions about Sailfish OS as well as more technical channels
for chat about developing on Sailfish OS and a very popular channel
devoted to porting Sailfish OS to work on other devices. [Read more
about connecting to IRC](https://sailfishos.org/community/) and the
channels that we're in.

We work with other communities too, such as
[Qt](https://wiki.qt.io/Online_Communities) who are important partners
for Sailfish OS and a lot of development is done there too.

Finally, just to prove we're not all highly advanced AI's, we meet up in
person as well -- there have been community meetups for Jolla, Sailfish
OS and other communities in cities all around the globe. There's always
something happening at [FOSDEM](https://fosdem.org) and we participate
in many other community gatherings too.
