---
IMPORTANT NOTE: DO NOT EDIT THIS FILE, instead edit its .mdpp then run ./precheckin.sh
title: Danish
permalink: Develop/L10n/Style_Guides/Danish/
parent: Style Guides
grand_parent: L10n
layout: default
---

# Style guidelines and principles

This document provides generic style guidelines for Sailfish OS. The
target audience for this documentation is everyone translating Sailfish
OS-related material. The goal is to create contemporary translations
that provide a high-quality user experience.

Sailfish OS audience and target group for the translations is young,
active users accustomed to social media and therefore its language.

Please consult Retskrivningsordbogen (the 2012 version) frequently. This
is the most prominent Danish tool for correct spelling, punctuation,
abbreviations and the like. Retskrivningsordbogen can be found online:
<http://www.dsn.dk/ro/>. Here you can search for entries (the tab
“Retskrivningsordbogen”), and you can search through rules (the tab
“Retskrivningsregler”). In case of discrepancies between these
guidelines and Retskrivningsordbogen, please raise a query.

# Basics of good writing style

  - Write in a personal style, engaging and involving the user.
  - Use active style and present tense. Use imperatives and talk to the
    user.
  - Make sure the text is consistent and clear and correct in grammar
    and spelling.
  - Write in short sentences.
  - Use a positive tone, avoid negative expressions.
  - Avoid ambiguity. Make sure that pronouns point clearly to the
    relevant nouns, and avoid long strings of modifiers or nouns.

Remember we are sailing on a jolly boat. Have fun\! Play with the
language. Be innovative and guide the readers onto a journey. Do not
attempt to use humor, but use fresh and fun tone where it naturally
fits. Remember that the most important part is delivering a clear
message.

Note that in technical writing, descriptions and instructions should not
include text that is written from a marketing point of view.

# Language and culture

Because our communication is targeted to international use and part of
it will be translated, try to keep the language culturally unambiguous,
be careful of religious references, and avoid using idiomatic
expressions or slang. The key aspects are clarity and simplicity.
Consider these targets when adapting the jolly tone to the texts. In
software UI translations: Respect the source text, but do not create
word for word translations. Take the context into account when
translating.

# Grammar

## Spelling

The latest edition of Retskrivningsordbogen allows for alternative
spelling of some terms. For the sake of consistency, please note the
following:

  - Allowed: **it, tv, cd-rom**
  - Instead of: **IT, TV, CD-rom**

## Articles

When possible, leave out articles.

## Nouns

Please remember that in Danish (unlike in English), most compound nouns
must be written in one word.

  - Correct: **kaffebønner, testrapport**
  - Incorrect: **kaffe bønner, test rapport**

If in doubt: Consult Retskrivningsordbogen, or simply write it in one
word.

## Person

Please try to be informal if that is natural in your language.

In Danish, use the second person:

  - Correct: **Vælg sange**
  - Incorrect: **Brugeren vælger sange**

Avoid using gender:

  - Correct: **Vælg sangene**
  - Incorrect: **Han vælger selv sangene**

Avoid pronouns:

  - Incorrect: **Du vælger selv sangene**

Keep addressing consistent: e.g. if a paragraph was started using the
second person, retain it throughout all its sentences (as opposed to
switching to third person or neutral mood).

## Gender

Use gender-neutral or all-inclusive terms to refer to human beings,
rather than terms that include man, woman, and similar masculine and
feminine terms.

For example:

  - Correct: **Forsanger**
  - Incorrect: **Sangerinde**

## Tense

Use the present tense. E.g.:

  - Correct: **Media player vælger sangene**
  - Incorrect: **Media player vil vælge sangene**

## Voice

Whenever possible, use the active voice. Keep the message clear and the
sentences short.

For example:

  - Correct: **Opdater dine kontoindstillinger i…**
  - Incorrect: **Kontoindstillinger opdateres i…**

## Mood

Use the imperative form.

For example:

  - Correct: **Gå til Indstillinger**
  - Incorrect: **Brugeren går til Indstillinger**

## Capitalisation

Capitalise application names and company names.

In the UI, start the first word with a capital letter.

Respect capitalisation rules of the language in question.

Capitalise application names and company names.

  - E.g. application name: **Kalender**.

In software UI: Start the first word with a capital letter, but not the
subsequent ones. The UI term Åbn besked, e.g.:

  - Correct: **Gå til Åbn besked**
  - Incorrect: **Gå til Åbn Besked**, **Gå til åbn besked**

In all other instances, please respect the capitalisation rules of the
language in question – see Retskrivningsordbogen.

## Menu style in the UI

User Interface menu items are named using verbs.

## Empty states in the UI

User Interface empty states are typically written in the 2-sentence
form, using verbs and active tone and, where possible, guiding the user
towards the next possible steps to take. Keep sentences short and
content informative. Where possible, guide user to reflect the good
sides of an application or service (like referring to friends instead of
contacts in the People app). For example:\
(tell the situation, what items are missing) (point user to next actions)\
No contacts yet. Pull down to add your friends.

App covers (that are shown in the Home) for empty states aim to be short
informative messages. Length is typically two words.

# Punctuation

## End punctuation

In UI strings, do not use a full stop at the end of a sentence if
there’s only one sentence. If there are two or more sentences, use
full stops normally.

If the segment ends with the colon or ellipsis, the translation should
follow the source.

## Comma

The traditional Danish comma is used (see Retskrivningsordbogen).

## Abbreviations

In technical writing, use common abbreviations. Do not use Latin
abbreviations.

In the UI, use common abbreviations, including Latin abbreviations. Make
sure text clarity does not suffer. If in doubt, do not use an
abbreviation.

Do not use a full stop in or after acronyms or initialisms, e.g.:

  - Correct: **WLAN**
  - Incorrect: **W.L.A.N.**

Do not use a full stop with unit (measurement) symbols, e.g.:

  - Correct: **kg**
  - Incorrect: **kg.**

Use a full stop with Latin abbreviations, e.g.:

  - Correct: **e.g., ca., etc.**
  - Incorrect: **eg, ca, etc**

## Hyphenation

Use hyphen in object-verbal noun compounds.

  - Correct: **read only-fil**
  - Incorrect: **read only fil, readonly fil**

Use hyphens in compound nouns.

  - Correct: cd-rom, cd-rom-drev
  - Incorrect: cd rom, cd rom drev or cd-rom drev

Please note that the hypen is short (-). For dashes, please use short
dash (–, "en dash", Alt + 0150). Do not use English long dashes (—, "em
dash", Alt + 0151) or double dashes. In many cases, dash may be replaced
by comma in the Danish sentence.

## Series

Use a comma to separate elements in a series, but not between the last
two elements.

  - Correct: **Vælg sang, mappe og placering**
  - Incorrect: **Vælg sang, mappe, og placering**

Use a semicolon to separate items in a series when one or more items
have internal punctuation.

## Plurals

Do not create plurals with parentheses. Consult translation tool user
guide for handling the plurals.

## Quotation marks

Respect language's quotation rules. A comprehensive list of marks can be
found here:
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quotation_mark#Summary_table_for_various_languages>

## Lists

In technical writing, write lists with bullets.

In the UI, write lists without bullets or colons.

## Headings

In technical writing, create structured, consistent and accurate
headings. Consider verb structures in headings.

## Text modules

In technical writing, make sure each module can be read independently,
containing all the needed information so that modules do not need to be
read in any certain order.

## Procedures

In technical writing, when describing procedures, make sure to describe
the steps clearly with only one task per step. Describe the expected
results of those steps.

# Numerals

## Numbers

Write numbers as digits, including numbers below 10.

For example:

  - Correct: **1 besked modtaget**
  - Incorrect: **En besked modtaget**

In Danish, decimals are written with a comma, unlike the English full
stop: **2,5 kg**

Thousand separators are written as full stop unlike the English comma:
**12.500 kg**

## Measurements

Use numerals for measurements.

Use a space between the numeral and the unit. This also goes for
percentage signs and degrees: **250 kg, 45 %, 20 ˚C**

# Terminology

Sailfish OS has a separate Terminology project to maintain consistency.
Use that approved terminology when available.

## Company names

Do not translate company names unless there is an official, translated
name available.

## Product names and trademarks

Do not translate product names or trademarks.

## Safety information and legal texts

Warnings, cautions, and notes are legal texts that need to be confirmed
with legal department. In case of legal texts, follow the instructions
carefully and ask for more information if needed.

# Checklist

When finalising translations for the UI, check the following:

  - Everything has been translated to your best knowledge.
  - Spell check is done.
  - Check consistency with the other translations done for the language.
  - Ensure correct Sailfish OS terminology is used. If needed, propose
    new term entries.
  - Confirm legal texts are consistent with the source.
  - Company and product names, trademarks, symbols, and measurements
    have not been hyphenated.
  - Ensure regional formats are retained, such as date, time, numeric
    and quotation literals.

When finalising texts for the technical writing, check these points as
well:

  - Titles and headings are structured and accurate.
  - Language is clear and consistent.
  - Sentences vary in length and have a clear form.

